---
title: The War of the Ghosts
layout: post
---

‘The War of the Ghosts’ is a Chinook story, recorded and translated by Franz Boaz (1901, 182-6), and subsequently used in a famous psychology experiment by Bartlett. Here is how Bartlett presented the tale in his report of 1920:

>In *The War of the Ghosts*… two young Indians are seal hunting, when they are accosted by warriors from a canoe, who ask them to help in a fight which is about to take place. One of the Indians agrees, and goes with them. In the fight he hears somebody say: ‘That young Indian has been hit,’ but he feels no hurt. He merely remarks casually: ‘Oh, they are ghosts.’ He goes back home, tells his friends, lights a fire, and the next morning at sunrise falls down: ‘something black came from his mouth. He was dead.’ (Bartlett 1920a, 37.)
 
Bartlett’s experimental subjects were students and teachers of his university. Some read the original story and, after a set interval, repeated it; sometimes to others who in turn repeated it, and so on. The experiment revealed the removal of the mysterious from the story and a gradual process of familiarisation of both details and basic narrative. For example, familiar words were frequently substituted for unfamiliar: ‘canoe’ became ‘boat’, ‘paddling’ became ‘rowing’, and so on. More strikingly, in “every one of the series of reproductions all mention of ghosts drops out almost immediately, and this in spite of the fact that ghosts appear in the original title”. Further modifications followed for, without the ghosts, the painless wound and strange death are left “in the air”. Over a series of reproductions the story was thus reconstructed; for example, by the ninth reproduction a real arrow from another point in the story was said to have hit the Indian, causing an ultimately mortal wound.

Bartlett’s experiment appears to have undergone a similar fate in the telling. Today it is widely discussed (we even found a “re-enactment” on YouTube in which a ten year-old girl recalls the story of ‘The Gift of a Cow Tail Switch’) and invariably presented as a celebrated contribution to the psychology of memory. More involved accounts will typically explain that Bartlett was investigating the effect of mental schema on participants’ recall.  These contemporary story tellers are psychologists of one kind or another, and their presentations mould the experiment to the disciplinarily familiar while occluding the mysterious. Bartlett always presented his experiment as an exercise in psychology; but he presented it originally as a contribution to the study of cultural diffusion. You will find ‘Some Experiments on the Reproduction of Folk-Stories’ in the March 1920 issue of Folk-Lore, sandwiched between the Presidential Address to the Folk-Lore Society delivered by A.C. Haddon, Reader of Ethnology at the University of Cambridge, and a paper on ‘The Concept of “Soul-Substance” in New Guinea and Melanesia’ by Rivers. Nor was this a flash in Bartlett’s psychological pan. The December issue of Folk-Lore carried a second essay, ‘Psychology in Relation to the Popular Story’, in which Bartlett criticized the treatment of the folk tale (be it by Frazer or by Freud) as an expression of individual psychology. A general statement of an alternative social psychology, which included an extended discussion of the folktale, was set out in Bartlett’s first book, Psychology and Primitive Culture (1923).

Psychology and Primitive Culture can be described as a mature fruit of the 1898 Cambridge Torres Strait expedition. Led by Haddon, this anthropological expedition had included, in addition to Rivers, the two men destined to become the leading lights of Edwardian psychology – Myers and McDougall. The immediate wake of the expedition saw the establishment in Cambridge of a new Psychological Laboratory, headed by Myers, and a new Board of Anthropology, which brought Rivers and Haddon together with traditional scholars, such as the Classical archaeologist William Ridgeway and the Anglo-Saxonist H.M. Chadwick. The early institutional histories of psychology and anthropology in Cambridge are thus closely intertwined.  And out of this meeting of anthropological minds a new social theory began to emerge: in place of older accounts of the evolution of particular social forms, attention now shifted to the interaction of social groups and the diffusion of culture (Cook, forthcoming).  Bartlett’s Psychology and Primitive Culture was essentially an attempt to provide the psychological underpinnings of this new social theory. 

### Notes

1. In his introduction to his collection of tales Boaz explains that he had two of them – of which one was ‘The War of the Ghosts’ – repeated three and a half years later in order to check the accuracy of his informant, Charles Cultee (Boaz 5). Bartlett does not mention this, but we may surmise that he found this initial repetition a useful check for his own purposes. Bartlett (1920a, 35, note) states that the version of the tale that he used for his experiment was “slightly adapted” from the translation by Boas, but does not elaborate. Comparison shows Bartlett to have censored the description of the death of the Indian at the end of the tale, which in Boas’ versions reads, in the 1891 version: “… something black came out of his mouth and blood came out of his anus. His face became contorted. He was dead” (184); and in the 1894 version: “Blood came out of his mouth, and something black came out of his anus. It was like salad berries” (186).

2. Bartlett began his career with the conviction that there was little psychology that was not social psychology, a position that is still clearly discernible in his classic Remembering (1954; see, e.g. p. 243), which also presented ‘The War of the Ghosts’ experiment, and from which almost all accounts of this experiment are drawn, and which was written after Bartlett, in the 1920s, had derived from Henry Head the idea of an individual mental schema. By the late 1950s, however, Bartlett appears to have largely discarded his concerns with the cultural and social dimensions of psychology (see Bruner 2000, xv).

3. McDougall and Rivers were two of the founding members of the British Psychological Society in 1901, with Myers becoming its secretary in 1904 with McDougall as his deputy. All three of these members of the Torres Straits expedition served on the society’s management committee. Both Myers and McDougall were closely involved in the establishment of British Journal of Psychology in 1904, which was first coedited by Rivers and James Ward, then from 1911 by Rivers and Myers, and then until 1924 by Myers alone.

4. Three key moments in the establishment of a new diffusionist social perspective that provided the context of Bartlett’s early work may be identified: in The Origin of Tragedy (1910), Ridgeway argued that Athenian tragedy arose out of a fusion of native (Pelasgian) funeral rituals and intruding (Achaean) lays for dead heroes; Chadwick followed up in The Heroic Age (1912) with an explanation of the origins of English individualism in the encounter between the Roman Empire and the pre-migration Continental tribes; while already in 1911, Rivers announced his “conversion” to diffusionism in his Presidential Address to the Anthropology Section of the British Association, where he recounted how he had come to see that the marriage customs he had recorded in his 1908 expedition to Melanesia were not, after all, the product of social evolution, but had rather come about “under the influence of the blending of peoples” (Rivers 1911, 494). 