---
title: Project Aims
layout: post
author: simon
---

What is most interesting in the humanities is in front of our noses but we do not see it.

The modern university system was established in Britain and North America in the last decades of the nineteenth and the first decades of the twentieth century. Modernization has gone hand in hand with professionalization - the setting up of autonomous disciplines, such as English, History, Anthropology, Religious Studies, and so on, each with their own canon, terminology, and specific methods of study. The result, as we witness today, is a number of highly specialized disciplines, which no longer speak either to the interested general public nor even to one another.

But it was not always like this, and indeed it was not like this for longer than is generally understood.

One particularly lamentable product of today's fragmented disciplines are 'disciplinary histories': attempts to write the history of the discipline as it is today by tracing its development from its supposed beginnings, often in the late nineteenth century. Invariably, such histories present their 'founders' as having the same narrow disciplinary perspectives as themselves. The result is that the history of ideas from around 1870 through to 1925 has been utterly distorted.

Once disciplinary histories are brushed aside, the intellectual history of this half-century or so around 1900 comes in to view as of peculiar interest for us today. Here we find essentially modern ideas that are still presented with a lay audience in mind and still formulated in relation to a holistic intellectual environment. In other words, here we find the ideas that actually interest us set out in relation to a rounded globe of knowledge.

 In this essay I select three seminal thinkers, each usually represented today as a founding father of a particular modern discipline: the economist Alfred Marshall, the psychologist F.C. Bartlett, and the English philologist and father of modern fantasy, J.R.R. Tolkien. By the lights of modern studies of these figures their respective writings have no point of contact. By focusing upon their historical thought - itself rendered invisible in today's literature - I explore their shared mental universe, highlight some of their most distinctive (if overlooked) ideas, and bring into view a whole world of thought, hitherto obscured.
